
--- Page 1 ---

Is your insurance company 
listening to you?
If your complaints have not been addressed 
by your insurance company,
please contact 
to register your complaints and track their status
or you may email us at complaints@irda.gov.in 
“Licence. 
Registration. 
Insurance.”
Handbook on
Motor Insurance
• 
IRDA Grievance Call Centre 
C Toll Free No.: 155255 
A public awareness initiative by 
.ftq-, fcif.,..,,q.., &itt'fcrcm:r~ 
INSURANCE REGULATORY AND 
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Promotmg msurance. Protecting insured. 
www.irda.gov.in 
• JI~ INSURANCE REGULATORY ANO 
!lll!Eil'Elll 
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
i 
-


--- Page 2 ---

Contents: 
1.  About this handbook
1
2. Motor Insurance
2
3. Frequently asked questions
5
4. Policyholder Servicing TATs
14
5. If you have a grievance
15
1.
About this handbook
This handbook is designed by the Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority (IRDA) as a guide on 
Motor Insurance and gives general information only. 
No information given herein replaces or overrides the 
terms and conditions of an insurance policy. 
Please approach a duly licensed agent or a broker or an 
insurance company registered with IRDA for specific 
information regarding a policy or for any other 
additional information. 
1


--- Page 3 ---

2. Motor Insurance
• What Motor Insurance is:
Motor insurance gives protection to the vehicle 
owner against (I). damages to his/her vehicle and 
(ii). pays for any Third Party Liability determined as 
per law against the owner of the vehicle.  Third Party 
Insurance is a statutory requirement. The owner of 
the vehicle is legally liable for any injury or damage 
to third party life or property caused by or arising out 
of the use of the vehicle in a public place. Driving a 
motor vehicle without insurance in a public place is 
a punishable offence in terms of the Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1988. 
• Types of Motor Insurance cover:
Broadly there are two types of insurances policies 
that offer motor insurance cover: 
a. Liability Only Policy (Statutory requirement) 
b. Package Policy (Liability Only Policy + Damage 
to owner’s Vehicle usually called O.D Cover)   
Remember that if you take only a Liability Only 
Policy, damage to your vehicle will not be covered. 
Hence, it would be prudent to take a Package Policy 
which would give a wider cover, including cover for 
your vehicle.   
• What Motor Insurance covers:
The damages to the vehicle due to the following 
perils  are usually covered under OD section of the 
Motor Insurance policy:
a. Fire, Explosion, Self- Ignition, Lightning 
b. Burglary/Housebreaking / Theft 
c. Riot & Strike 
d. Earthquake 
e. Flood, Storm, Cyclone, Hurricane, tempest, 
inundation, hailstorm, frost
f. Accidental external means 
g. Malicious Act 
h. Terrorism acts 
i. While in Transit by Rail/ Road, Inland 
waterways, Lift, Elevator or Air 
j. Land slide / Rock slide   
• What Motor Insurance excludes:
The following contingencies are usually excluded 
under the Motor Insurance Policy:
3
2


--- Page 4 ---

• Not having  a valid Driving License
• Under Influence of intoxicating liquor/ drugs
• Accident taking place beyond Geographical limits
• While Vehicle is used for unlawful purposes
• Electrical/Mechanical Breakdowns.   
• Basis of Sum Insured:
For Own Damage:
The Sum Insured under a Motor Insurance policy 
reflects the value of the motor vehicle determined 
based on the concept known as Insured’s Declared 
Value.  Insured’s Declared Value is the value arrived at 
based on the Manufacturer’s present value and 
depreciation based on the Age of the Vehicle.   
For Third Party:  
Coverage is as per requirements of the Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1988 . Compulsory Personal accident cover for 
owner-driver is also included. Policy can also be 
extended to cover various other risks like Personal 
Accident to occupants of vehicle, Workmen's 
Compensation to Driver, etc over and above the cover 
available to him under statute.
3.
FAQs on Motor Insurance
Q.
What Motor Insurance cover should I buy? 
Should I buy Comprehensive Insurance or 
Liability only Policy ? 
Ans. Third Party Liability insurance is mandatory for 
all vehicles plying on public roads in India. This 
covers Liability for injuries and damages to 
others that you are responsible for. In addition, it 
is prudent to cover loss or damages to the vehicle 
itself by way of Comprehensive/Package policy, 
which covers both “Liability” as well as “Own 
damage” to Insured vehicle. Liability Only cover 
is also known as Act Only cover.
Q.
How is the premium determined? 
Ans. Many factors determine the premium you will 
pay. For Own Damage cover different insurance 
companies charge different premiums for similar 
coverage. Shop around; getting three or more 
comparison quotes is worthwhile. Check various 
insurers’s websites; it will help you compare 
premiums. Do not forget to compare deductibles, 
coverage and IDV’s as premium may be lesser of 
one insurer but with higher deductibles, lower 
coverage and lower IDV, which will adversely 
impact you in the event of claim settlement. 
5
4


--- Page 5 ---

Be prepared to give your agent information about 
the following items that are commonly used to 
determine your premium: Vehicle registration 
details with Engine No., Chasis no., Class of 
vehicle, cubic capacity, seating capacity, etc. (In 
fact, all relevant details are in the RC book/card 
and a copy of same may be handed over) Tax paid 
details; Certificate of fitness, Driver details - age, 
gender, qualifications, licence validity Previous 
insurance history, if any. 
The Own Damage coverage is left to be rated by 
individual insurance companies after duly filing 
rates with the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority. The same is 
determined  on following factors amongst others 
-- Age of vehicle; Discounts / loadings- 
Appropriate Bonus / loading/ discounts along 
with past claims experience are taken into 
account while calculating premium. IDV 
(Insured Declared Value). 
Third Party Liability Premium rates are laid 
down by IRDA.
In case of break in insurance, vehicle inspection 
would be required and extra charges will have to 
be incurred for the same. 
Q.
What coverage limits meet my needs? 
Ans.
vehicle is called “Insured Declared Value” and 
should reflect the current market value of the 
vehicle. For Third Party Liability cover, there is 
unlimited coverage to Third parties injuries, 
however, Third party property damages are 
covered up to a sum of Rs.750,000. Insured has 
option to restrict coverage for Third Party 
Property damage to Rs.6,000 whereby there will 
be reduction in “Liability Only” premium. 
Q.
What is the period of the policy? 
Ans. The policy is usually valid for a period of one year 
and has to be renewed before the due date. Pay 
the premium on time. No Insurer offers a grace 
period for paying the premium – the due date is 
the due date. In case of lapse of policy by even 
one day, the vehicle has to be inspected. 
Moreover, if a comprehensive policy is allowed to 
lapse for more than 90 days, the accrued benefit 
of NCB (No Claim Bonus) is also lost.
Q.
What is "No Claim Bonus"? 
Ans. No Claim Bonus (NCB) is the benefit accrued to 
an insured for NIL claims during the previous 
policy period.  As per current norms prevalent, it 
ranges from 20% on the Own Damage premium 
(and not on Liability premium) and progressively 
 For Own Damage, the Sum Insured for the 
7
6


--- Page 6 ---

increases to a maximum of 50% based on 
successive claim free years. If, however, a claim is 
lodged, the No claim Bonus is lost in the 
subsequent policy period. NCB is given to 
insured and not to the insured vehicle. Hence, 
on transfer of the vehicle, the insurance policy 
can be transferred to new owner but not the 
NCB. The new owner has to pay the difference 
on account of NCB for the balance policy period. 
The original owner can, however, use the NCB 
on a new vehicle purchased by him provided he 
has not transferred the insurance to the buyer of 
old car. Insurance Co has to be intimated 
immediately (in any case not later than the time 
limit prescribed) about sale of his old vehicle and 
his intention to retain the insurance. Original 
certificate of Insurance is to be surrendered to 
Insurance Co. within 3 years period, as and when 
the Insured buys a new car, it will be substituted 
in the old insurance policy till its validity period. 
Pro-rata difference of premium on account of 
increase in IDV of new vehicle is to be paid.
Q.
Will my No Claim Bonus get migrated if I want 
to change my insurance company? 
Ans. Yes, you can avail of the NCB facility if you 
change the insurer on renewal. You would have 
to produce proof of the NCB earned by way of 
renewal notice from the current insurer. If the 
same cannot be produced, you may produce your 
original expiring policy along with a certification 
that no claim has been lodged by yourself on the 
expiring policy. Hence, evidence can be in form 
of a renewal notice or a letter confirming the 
NCB entitlement from the previous insurer.
Q.
Are there discounts that will lower my 
premium? 
Ans. In addition to NCB, there are additional 
discounts available under Own Damage 
Premium for membership of Automobile 
Association of India, Vintage Cars (Pvt. Cars 
certified by the Vintage and Classic Car Club of 
India); Installation of anti-theft devices 
approved by Automobile Research Association 
of India (ARAI), Pune and whose installation is 
approved by AAI; Concessions for specially 
designed/modified vehicles for the Blind, 
Handicapped and mentally challenged persons, 
which are suitably endorsed in the RC by the 
RTA concerned; - opting for voluntary 
additional deductible/excess. 
Under “Liability Only Section”, discounts are 
available for reduction in Third Party Property 
Damage 
(TPPD) from Rs. 750,000 to Rs. 6,000. 
9
8


--- Page 7 ---

Q.
Is Service Tax is applicable and how much is it? 
Ans.
per prevailing rule of law. 
  
Q.
What is deductible? 
Ans. Deductible or “excess” is the amount over and 
above, which the claim will be payable. There is a 
normal standard/compulsory excess for most 
vehicles ranging from Rs. 50 for two-wheelers to 
Rs. 500 for Pvt. Cars and Commercial vehicles 
which increases depending upon the cubic 
capacity/carrying capacity of the vehicle. 
However, in some cases the insurer may impose 
additional excess depending upon the age of the 
vehicle or  if there is high frequency of claims. 
  
Q.
What is the procedure for recording any 
changes in the policy? 
Ans. If there are any changes in the policy, it will be 
done by an Endorsement by the insurance office. 
Submit a letter to the insurer with proof for the 
changes and obtain the Endorsement. Check the 
correctness of the Endorsement. 
  
Q.
If I am using the car in a particular city, what 
premium rate is applied? 
Ans. For the purpose of applying premium rate, the 
Yes , Service Tax is applicable and would be as  
place where the vehicle is registered is reckoned 
(Not the place where the vehicle is used). If your 
vehicle is registered in Chennai rate applicable 
for Zone A is charged. Even when you shift to a 
different city / town, the same rate will continue 
to be applied. Similarly if a vehicle is registered in 
a town, it attracts Zone B premium rate. 
Subsequently if the owner shifts to a metro, he 
will continue to be charged Zone B rate. 
  
Q.
What is a Certificate of Insurance under 
Motor Vehicle Act? 
Ans. As per Rule 141 of Central Motor Vehicle Rules 
1989, a certificate of Insurance is to be issued 
only in Form 51. It is only in Motor Vehicle 
Insurance, apart from policy, a separate 
certificate of insurance is required to be issued by 
Insurers as per law. This document should always 
be carried in the vehicle. Policy should be 
preserved separately at home / office. 
  
Q.
If I fit CNG or LPG kit to my vehicle, is it 
necessary to inform the Insurance Company? 
Ans. If CNG / LPG kit is fitted to the vehicle, RTA 
where the vehicle was registered should be 
informed to note the change in the registration 
certificate (RC). The Insurance Company 
should also be informed to have the kit covered 
11
10


--- Page 8 ---

on payment of extra premium on the value of the 
kit under “OD” section and also under “TP” 
section. 
 
Q.
What are the documents to be kept in the 
vehicle while plying in public places? 
Ans. • Certificate of Insurance 
• Xerox copy of Registration Certificate
• Pollution under control Certificate
• Copy of DL of person who drives the vehicle
  
Q.
Can I transfer my insurance to the purchaser 
of my vehicle? 
Ans. Yes, the insurance can be transferred to the buyer 
of the vehicle, provided the seller informs in 
writing of such transfer to the insurance 
company. A fresh proposal form needs to be filled 
in. There is a nominal fee charged for transfer of 
insurance along with pro-rata recovery of NCB 
from the date of transfer till policy expiry. It may 
be noted that transfer of ownership in 
comprehensive/package policies has to be 
recorded within 14 days from date of transfer 
failing which no claim will be payable for own 
damages to the vehicle. 
  
Q.
Can I continue the insurance in the name of 
the previous owner even after the vehicle is 
transferred in RTO records in my name? 
Ans.
should always be in the same name with same 
address. Otherwise the claim is not payable. A 
fresh proposal form needs to be filled in. There is 
a nominal fee charged for transfer of insurance. 
  
Q.
I have lost the insurance policy. Can I get a 
duplicate one? 
Ans. Yes, please approach the same office, which had 
issued the policy, with a written request. A 
nominal fee is charged for issuing duplicate 
policy copy. 
Q.
What are the documents that are required to 
be submitted for a Motor Insurance claim? 
Ans. Generally, the following documents are required 
to be submitted. However, read through your 
policy to see the complete list—duly filled in 
claim form, RC copy of the vehicle, Original 
estimate of loss, Original repair invoice and 
payment receipt. In case cashless facility is 
availed, only repair invoice would need to be 
submitted and  FIR, if required. For theft claims, 
the keys are to be submitted. Theft claims would 
also require non-traceable certificate to be 
submitted.  
 No. Registration and insurance of the vehicle 
13
12


--- Page 9 ---

Policyholder Servicing Turnaround Times 
as prescribed by IRDA
5.
If you have a grievance:
The Consumer Affairs Department of the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) has 
introduced the Integrated Grievance Management 
System (IGMS) which is an online system for 
registration and tracking of grievances. You must 
register your grievance first with the insurance 
company and in case you are not satisfied with its 
disposal by the company, you may escalate it to IRDA 
through IGMS by accessing www.igms.irda.gov.in. In 
case you are not able to access the insurer’s grievance 
system directly, IGMS also provides you a gateway to 
register your grievance with the insurer.
Apart from registering your grievance through IGMS 
(i.e., web), you have several channels for grievance 
registration-through e-mail (complaints@irda.gov.in), 
through letter ( address your letter to Consumer Affairs 
Department, Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority, 3rd Floor, Parishram Bhavan, Basheerbagh, 
Hyderabad:4) or simply call IRDA Call Centre at 
Toll Free 155255 through which IRDA shall, free of 
cost, register your complaints against insurance 
companies as well as help track its status. The Call 
Centre assists by filling up the complaints form on the 
basis of the call. Wherever required, it will facilitate in 
filing of complaints directly with the insurance 
Service
Maximum 
Turn Around Time
General
Life Insurance
General Insurance
Grievances
Processing of Proposal and Communication 
of decisions including requirements/issue 
of Policy /Cancellations
Obtaining copy of the proposal
30 days
Post Policy issue service requests concerning 
10 days
mistakes/refund of proposal deposit and also 
Non-Claim related service requests
Surrender value/annuity/pension processing
10 days
Maturity claim/Survival benefit/penal 
15 days
interest not paid
Raising claim requirements after lodging 
15 days
the Claim
Death claim settlement without 
30 days
Investigation requirement
Death claim settlement/repudiation with 
6 months
Investigation requirement
Survey report submission
30 days
Insurer seeking addendum report
15 days
Settlement/rejection of Claim after 
30 days
receiving first/addendum survey report
Acknowledge a grievance
3 days
Resolve a grievance
15 days
15 days
15
14


--- Page 10 ---

companies as the first port of call by giving information 
relating to the address, telephone number, website 
details, contact number, e-mail id etc of the insurance 
company. IRDA Call Centre offers a true alternative 
channel for prospects and policyholders, with 
comprehensive tele-functionalities, serving as a 12 
hours x 6 days service platform from 8 AM to 8 PM, 
Monday to Saturday in Hindi, English and various 
Indian languages.
When a complaint is registered with IRDA, it facilitates 
resolution by taking it up with the insurance company. 
The company is given 15 days time to resolve the 
complaint. If required, IRDA carries out investigations 
and enquiries. Further, wherever applicable, IRDA 
advises the complainant to approach the Insurance 
Ombudsman in terms of the Redressal of Public 
Grievances Rules, 1998.
Disclaimer: 
This handbook is intended to provide you general information only 
and is not exhaustive. It is an education initiative and does not seek 
to give you any legal advice.
16
